
PEP: 9999
Title: Interpolated Template Strings
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Nick Humrich <nick.humrich@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Requires: 501
Created: 01-Jun-2021
Python-Version: 3.X
Post-History: -

Abstract
========

PEP 501 is a permanantly deferred PEP that proproposes an alternative approach to f-strings
for lazy evaluation of strings. Lots of use cases were discussed on that PEP such as 
internationalization, secure escaping, and logging. 

This PEP is a follow-up to PEP 501, attempting to revisit the ideas in 501, but bring them to a conclusion. 

As stated in PEP 501:

"[f-strings] only offer [a basic] capability for string formatting, making it likely
we will see code like the following::

    os.system(f"echo {message_from_user}")

This kind of code is superficially elegant, but poses a significant problem
if the interpolated value ``message_from_user`` is in fact provided by an
untrusted user: it's an opening for a form of code injection attack, where
the supplied user data has not been properly escaped before being passed to
the ``os.system`` call."


Summary of differences from PEP 501
===================================

The key additions this proposal makes relative to PEP 501:

* the "t" prefix instead of the "i" prefix. 
* addressing concerns from the time of 501.
* 501 was a competing PEP with 498. This PEP is intended to be a companion to 498 (f-strings)
* Changed the name to "Template strings" to more closely align with the name of the feature in JavaScript.

NOTE: This proposal spells out a draft API for ``types.InterpolationTemplate``.


Proposal
========

This PEP proposes the introduction of a new string prefix that declares the
string to be an interpolation template rather than an ordinary string::

    template = t"Substitute {names} and {expressions()} at runtime"

This would be effectively interpreted as::

    _raw_template = "Substitute {names} and {expressions()} at runtime"
    _field_values = {'names': names, 'expressions()': expressions()}
    template = types.InterpolationTemplate(_raw_template,
                                           _field_values)

The ``__format__`` method on ``types.InterpolationTemplate`` would then
implement the following ``str.format`` inspired semantics::

  >>> import datetime
  >>> name = 'Jane'
  >>> age = 50
  >>> anniversary = datetime.date(1991, 10, 12)
  >>> format(t'My name is {name}, my age next year is {age+1}, my anniversary is {anniversary:%A, %B %d, %Y}.')
  'My name is Jane, my age next year is 51, my anniversary is Saturday, October 12, 1991.'
  >>> format(t'She said her name is {repr(name)}.')
  "She said her name is 'Jane'."

As with formatted strings, the template prefix can be combined with single-quoted, double-quoted and triple quoted strings, including raw strings.
It does not support combination with bytes literals.


Rationale
=========

PEP 498 has become a fairly important feature to Python. Some argue that PEP 498 and its proposed
"f-strings"have been the main incentive for people to move to Python 3. 
"f-strings" are now fairly ubiquitus and understood by the python community.
The formatted strings of PEP 498 make interpolating values into strings with full access to Python's
lexical namespace semantics simpler, but it does so eagerly, resulting in an immediate string object.
There are situations where string evaluation should be delayed and/or lazily evaualted.
Some of these situations are where interpolating values into sensitive targets like SQL queries,
shell commands and HTML templates -- or when logging objects, and only want to do so if the log will actually render.

This PEP proposes to provide the option of delaying the actual rendering
of an interpolation template to its ``__format__`` method, allowing the use of
other template renderers by passing the template around as a first class object.

While very different in the technical details, the
``types.TemplateString`` interface proposed in this PEP is
conceptually quite similar to the ``FormattableString`` type underlying the
`native interpolation <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dn961160.aspx>`__ support introduced in C# 6.0, 
or to Tagged Templates support introduced in JavaScript in ES2016.


Specification
=============

This PEP proposes the introduction of ``t`` as a new string prefix that
results in the creation of an instance of a new type,
``types.InterpolationTemplate``.

Template literals are Unicode strings (bytes literals are not
permitted), and string literal concatenation operates as normal, with the
entire combined literal forming the interpolation template.

The template string is parsed into literals, expressions and format specifiers
as described for f-strings in PEP 498. Conversion specifiers are handled
by the compiler, and appear as part of the field text in interpolation
templates.

However, rather than being rendered directly into a formatted strings, these
components are instead organised into an instance of a new type with the
following semantics::

    class TemplateString:
        __slots__ = ("raw_template", "field_values")

        def __new__(cls, raw_template, field_values):
            self = super().__new__(cls)
            self.raw_template = raw_template
            self.field_values = field_values
            return self

        def __repr__(self):
            return (f"<{type(self).__qualname__} {repr(self._raw_template)} "
                    f"at {id(self):#x}>")

        def __format__(self, format_specifier):
            # When formatted, render to a string, and use string formatting
            return self.raw_template.format(**self.field_values)


The result of a template string is an instance of this
type, rather than an already rendered string - rendering only takes
place when ``__format__`` method is called. Although, the main purpose
is for other libraries to use the template, and render it how they see fit. 

The compiler will pass the following details to the interpolated template string for
later use:

* a string containing the raw template as written in the source code
* a dictionary containing the field names with the evaluated field values.
  Note: Because python dictionaries maintain insertion order, ``field_values.values()``
  will still be in the correct order, if order matters. 
  
The raw template is just the interpolation template as a string. By default,
it is used to provide a human readable representation for the interpolation
template. It also allows developers to more easily render a string by replacing the values
and calling ``raw_template.format(**my_values)``

The dictionary of field specifiers holds the raw string of the field as the key, and the
*results* of evaluating the field specifiers as f-strings.

Conversion specifiers
---------------------

NOTE:

   Appropriate handling of conversion specifiers is currently an open question.
   Exposing them more directly to custom renderers would increase the
   complexity of the ``InterpolationTemplate`` definition without providing an
   increase in expressiveness (since they're redundant with calling the builtins
   directly). At the same time, they *are* made available as arbitrary strings
   when writing custom ``string.Formatter`` implementations, so it may be
   desirable to offer similar levels of flexibility of interpretation in
   interpolation templates.

The ``!a``, ``!r`` and ``!s`` conversion specifiers supported by ``str.format``
and hence PEP 498 are handled in interpolation templates as follows:

* they're included unmodified in the raw template to ensure no information is
  lost
* the corresponding field value placed in the field values tuple is
  converted appropriately *before* being passed to the template strings

This means that, for most purposes, the difference between the use of
conversion specifiers and calling the corresponding builtins in the
original interpolation template will be transparent to custom renderers. The
difference will only be apparent if reparsing the raw template, or attempting
to reconstruct the original template from the parsed template.

Writing custom renderers
------------------------

Writing a custom renderer doesn't requiring any special syntax. Instead,
custom renderers are ordinary callables that process a template strings
directly either by calling the ``__format__()`` method, or by accessing the
template's data attributes directly.

For example, the following function would render a template using objects'
``repr`` implementations rather than their native formatting support::

    def reprformat(template):
        rendered_fields = {k, repr(v) for k, v in template.field_values.items()}
        return template.raw_template.format(**rendered_fields)


Expression evaluation
---------------------

As with f-strings, the subexpressions that are extracted from the interpolation
template are evaluated in the context where the interpolation template
appears. This means the expression has full access to local, nonlocal and global variables. Any valid Python expression can be used inside ``{}``, including
function and method calls.

Because the substitution expressions are evaluated where the string appears in
the source code, there are no additional security concerns related to the
contents of the expression itself, as you could have also just written the
same expression and used runtime field parsing::

  >>> bar=10
  >>> def foo(data):
  ...   return data + 20
  ...
  >>> str(t'input={bar}, output={foo(bar)}')
  'input=10, output=30'

Is essentially equivalent to::

  >>> 'input={}, output={}'.format(bar, foo(bar))
  'input=10, output=30'

Handling code injection attacks
-------------------------------

The PEP 498 formatted string syntax makes it potentially attractive to write
code like the following::

    runquery(f"SELECT {column} FROM {table};")
    runcommand(f"cat {filename}")
    return_response(f"<html><body>{response.body}</body></html>")

These all represent potential vectors for code injection attacks, if any of the
variables being interpolated happen to come from an untrusted source. The
specific proposal in this PEP is designed to make it straightforward to write
use case specific renderers that take care of quoting interpolated values
appropriately for the relevant security context::

    runquery(sql(t"SELECT {column} FROM {table};"))
    runcommand(sh(t"cat {filename}"))
    return_response(html(t"<html><body>{response.body}</body></html>"))

This PEP does not cover adding such renderers to the standard library
immediately, but rather proposes to ensure that they can be readily provided by
third party libraries, and potentially incorporated into the standard library
at a later date. 

Earlier discussions of PEP 501 focused a lot on these different renders, and even had some
early proposals for having custom "tagged" templates, such as in JavaScript.
However, experience with JavaScript tagged templates can teach us that the renderer itself it not strictly neccesary,
but rather, what is important is the delay of the rendering.
Rather than require renders such as ``sql()``, the top level method ``runquery()`` could be written to accept
template strings, and render those appropriately itself. This allows third party libraries even more
protection against injection attackes by potentially enforcing that they 
are passed in a template string and not a normal strings. 
Since the evaluation is lazy, ``runquery()`` would know the difference between the 
safe part and the "dirty" (user input) part of the string, and could potentially 
eliminate injection if it never accepted normal strings.

Renderers such as ``sql()`` should still exist for backwards compatibilty
for libraires that do not support template strings.

A possible implementation for such a SQL renderer, using `sqlalchemy.sql.text`` to return
an `SQL Alchemy query object <http://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/rel_1_0/core/tutorial.html#using-textual-sql>`__.

    def sql(template):
        param_names = {}
        final_values = {}
        for i (k, v) in enumerate(template.field_values.items()):
            sql_key = f'value_{i}'
            param_names[k] = f':{sql_key}'
            final_values[sql_key] = v
        return sqlalchemy.text(template.raw_template.format(**param_names).params(**final_values)
        

Format specifiers
-----------------

Aside from them appearing in the raw template,
format specifiers are otherwise treated as opaque strings by the interpolation
template parser - assigning semantics to those (or, alternatively,
prohibiting their use) is handled at runtime by the field renderer.

Error handling
--------------

Either compile time or run time errors can occur when processing template strings.
Compile time errors are limited to those errors that can be
detected when parsing a template string into its values. These
errors all raise SyntaxError.

Unmatched braces::

  >>> i'x={x'
    File "<stdin>", line 1
  SyntaxError: missing '}' in interpolation expression

Invalid expressions::

  >>> i'x={!x}'
    File "<fstring>", line 1
      !x
      ^
  SyntaxError: invalid syntax

Run time errors occur when evaluating the expressions inside a
template string before creating the template object. See PEP 498
for some examples.

Different renderers may also impose additional runtime
constraints on acceptable interpolated expressions and other formatting
details, which will be reported as runtime exceptions.


Possible integration with the logging module
============================================

One of the challenges with the logging module has been that we have previously
been unable to devise a reasonable migration strategy away from the use of
printf-style formatting. The runtime parsing and interpolation overhead for
logging messages also poses a problem for extensive logging of runtime events
for monitoring purposes.

While beyond the scope of this initial PEP, interpolation template support
could potentially be added to the logging module's event reporting APIs,
permitting relevant details to be captured using forms like::

    logging.debug(t"Event: {event}; Details: {data}")
    logging.critical(t"Error: {error}; Details: {data}")

Rather than the current mod-formatting style::

    logging.debug("Event: %s; Details: %s", event, data)
    logging.critical("Error: %s; Details: %s", event, data)

As the interpolation template is passed in as an ordinary argument, other
keyword arguments would also remain available::

    logging.critical(t"Error: {error}; Details: {data}", exc_info=True)

As part of any such integration, a recommended approach would need to be
defined for "lazy evaluation" of interpolated fields, as the ``logging``
module's existing delayed interpolation support provides access to
`various attributes <https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.html#logrecord-attributes>`__ of the event ``LogRecord`` instance.

For example, since interpolation expressions are arbitrary Python expressions,
string literals could be used to indicate cases where evaluation itself is
being deferred, not just rendering::

    logging.debug(t"Logger: {'record.name'}; Event: {event}; Details: {data}")

This could be further extended with idioms like using inline tuples to indicate
deferred function calls to be made only if the log message is actually
going to be rendered at current logging levels::

    logging.debug(t"Event: {event}; Details: {expensive_call, raw_data}")

This kind of approach would be possible as having access to the actual *text*
of the field expression would allow the logging renderer to distinguish
between inline tuples that appear in the field expression itself, and tuples
that happen to be passed in as data values in a normal field.


Discussion
==========

Refer to PEP 498 for additional discussion, as several of the points there
also apply to this PEP.

Deferring support for binary interpolation
------------------------------------------

Supporting binary interpolation with this syntax would be relatively
straightforward (the elements in the parsed fields tuple would just be
byte strings rather than text strings, and the default renderer would be
markedly less useful), but poses a significant likelihood of producing
confusing type errors when a text renderer was presented with
binary input.

Since the proposed syntax is useful without binary interpolation support, and
such support can be readily added later, further consideration of binary
interpolation is considered out of scope for the current PEP.

Interoperability with str-only interfaces
-----------------------------------------

For interoperability with interfaces that only accept strings, interpolation
templates can still be prerendered with ``format``, rather than delegating the
rendering to the called function.

This reflects the key difference from PEP 498, which *always* eagerly applies
the default rendering, without any way to delegate the choice of renderer to
another section of the code.

Preserving the raw template string
----------------------------------

Earlier versions of this PEP failed to make the raw template string available
on the interpolation template. Retaining it makes it possible to provide a more
attractive template representation, as well as providing the ability to
precisely reconstruct the original string, including both the expression text
and the details of any eagerly rendered substitution fields in format specifiers.

Creating a rich object rather than a global name lookup
-------------------------------------------------------

Earlier versions of this PEP used an ``__interpolate__`` builtin, rather than
a creating a new kind of object for later consumption by interpolation
functions. Creating a rich descriptive object with a useful default renderer
made it much easier to support customisation of the semantics of interpolation.

Building atop PEP 498, rather than competing with it
----------------------------------------------------

Earlier versions of this PEP attempted to serve as a complete substitute for
PEP 498, rather than building a more flexible delayed rendering capability on
top of PEP 498's eager rendering.

Assuming the presence of f-strings as a supporting capability simplified a
number of aspects of the proposal in this PEP (such as how to handle substitution
fields in format specifiers)

Deferring consideration of possible use in i18n use cases
---------------------------------------------------------

The initial motivating use case for this PEP was providing a cleaner syntax
for i18n translation, as that requires access to the original unmodified
template. As such, it focused on compatibility with the substitution syntax used
in Python's ``string.Template`` formatting and Mozilla's l20n project.

However, subsequent discussion revealed there are significant additional
considerations to be taken into account in the i18n use case, which don't
impact the simpler cases of handling interpolation into security sensitive
contexts (like HTML, system shells, and database queries), or producing
application debugging messages in the preferred language of the development
team (rather than the native language of end users).

Due to the original design of the ``str.format`` substitution syntax in PEP
3101 being inspired by C#'s string formatting syntax, the specific field
substitution syntax used in PEP 498 is consistent not only with Python's own ``str.format`` syntax, but also with string formatting in C#, including the
native "$-string" interpolation syntax introduced in C# 6.0 (released in July
2015).  The related ``IFormattable`` interface in C# forms the basis of a
`number of elements <https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.iformattable.aspx>`__ of C#'s internationalization and localization
support.

This means that while this particular substitution syntax may not
currently be widely used for translation of *Python* applications (losing out
to traditional %-formatting and the designed-specifically-for-i18n
``string.Template`` formatting), it *is* a popular translation format in the
wider software development ecosystem (since it is already the preferred
format for translating C# applications).

Acknowledgements
================

* Eric V. Smith for creating PEP 498 and demonstrating the feasibility of
  arbitrary expression substitution in string interpolation
* Barry Warsaw, Armin Ronacher, and Mike Miller for their contributions to
  exploring the feasibility of using this model of delayed rendering in i18n
  use cases (even though the ultimate conclusion was that it was a poor fit,
  at least for current approaches to i18n in Python)

References
==========

.. [#] %-formatting
       (https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#printf-style-string-formatting)

.. [#] str.format
       (https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#formatstrings)

.. [#] string.Template documentation
       (https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#template-strings)

.. [#] PEP 215: String Interpolation
       (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0215/)

.. [#] PEP 292: Simpler String Substitutions
       (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0292/)

.. [#] PEP 3101: Advanced String Formatting
       (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-3101/)

.. [#] PEP 498: Literal string formatting
       (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0498/)

.. [#] FormattableString and C# native string interpolation
       (https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dn961160.aspx)

.. [#] IFormattable interface in C# (see remarks for globalization notes)
       (https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.iformattable.aspx)

.. [#] Running external commands in Julia
       (http://julia.readthedocs.org/en/latest/manual/running-external-programs/)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
